We'll take two. I don't really think the coffee
would be better. It makes me more nervous, and you
might tranquilize me.
What sort of support did you receive, let's say,
from your superiors when you began to consider the
idea of consolidation? In the early 60s, nobody
saw any necessity for consolidation. because
they wouldn't see any necessity necessarily for
oceanography. We received complete support
from, I'd say, the Secretariat of the Navy as
opposed to the military side of the Navy. And I
think the reason for that is the military side was
not that personally involved in the scientific
side of oceanography. And don't forget, we were
just breaking into engineering in the early 60s.
Engineering really didn't even come of age until
after the Thresher.
I think that's a relatively fair and accurate
statement. The Thresher forced engineering to
come of age. We had things before that, but it began
to force the recognition of it. As far as man in the
sea is concerned, the Navy
had led the world in diving, and yet the Navy got way
behind it. I mean, the people argue today that the
Navy diver goes to 190 feet and the oil diver goes to
1,000 feet. Well, the Navy did the science to get
you to 1,000 feet, but the Navy won't operate it.
It's divers at 1,000 feet. Because the Navy is a
very conservative organization. Its
regulations are written in blood. This leads you
to believe that you have to be careful how you
regulate things. And I remember when they kept
saying to the Navy, you take over the
responsibility for certifying submersibles. My
answer to that was, all right, but always put that
clause in there that allows you to exempt things
for science and for research and for development.
Because if you insist upon the kinds of criteria
that bureaucracy will put on you, you'll never get
from here to there because you'll always design
something that's fail-safe, and you'll always
design something based on what you had yesterday
and not what you hope to get tomorrow. So we always
put that clause in the kinds of things we were doing
and then ran it from the Secretary's office. I
think in today's world, the bigger bureaucrats,
the head of the Office of Management and Budget and
down a couple echelons, the White House, And I
speak of the White House in an amorphic sense and
not whether it's a Republican or Democrat. The
Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of
Defense, the Secretary of the Navy, and even the
Chief of Naval Operations recognize that
consolidation is a way, they look at it as a way of
saving money and manpower. I look at it as that's
true, but I don't want to save anything. I want to
just get more so that I can do the job that I think we
all have to do because we all know we don't have
enough manpower resources or dollar resources.
And today I've had a lot of support from everybody
in the bureaucratic system throughout
government for consolidation for one reason or
another, mostly because of the reason of saving
money in billets. And very little cooperation
from most of the academic community and most of the
scientific community because they see it as a
threat to their existence or to their way of doing
business. And they have a rational fear because
large organizations tend to justify their
existence on what they do internally as opposed to
what someone else does for them externally. And so
we have tried to be very careful in the
consolidation to ensure that the academic part of
oceanography has a fence built around it so you
can't use those dollars to build up somebody's
empire internally. I think that's a very valid
fear. That fear stated to me by the people I
respect, like Tex and
Calhoun and those people there. I certainly,
they've talked to me privately. Art Maxwell,
Nuremberg, Paul Fye, Walter Monk. I can name you
hundreds of people that have talked on that
problem. And I have had, they have been
intelligent about it and focused on what the real
problem is. Many times, People criticize you, and
you spend an awful lot of time finding out what
really is their concern, what is their problem as
they see it. Because it doesn't really matter if
it's a real mathematical problem, because when
you're dealing with people, a problem perceived
is in fact a real problem, even though it's not a
mathematical problem. It's been difficult to
sort out what people's real objection is. There
are very valid objections in the academic world. I
think we have pretty much put the system in gear to
ensure that the safety checks and balances are
there. In the other part of the world, that is the
in-house internal Navy world, they're very
concerned that you don't take away from them what
they have. I say they say what they need to do their
job. I would never take away from a man what he needs
to do his job, but I would take away from a man what he
thinks he needs to do his job when I think that the
major job is yet to be done and can be done better in
another group. And I think there's another
problem in today's world which wasn't
necessarily here in the 60s, and that is that
you're not going to get large amounts of money in
either the scientific world or the Department of
Defense world or the Department of the Navy world
to build bricks and mortar. We had that capability
in the early 60s, both academically and
militarily. I think that that disappeared
sometime during Vietnam. And so as to the physical
choice of where you do it, you get locked in cement
in a hurry. The reason they chose Mississippi was
not the way the newspaper said. There was no
political pressure. Senator Stennis didn't even
know we'd chosen it until we told him. It was a real
simple thing. About $200 million worth of bricks
and mortar and not being used. That's a phase out of
the NASA project, right? Yeah, it was built up for
Apollo. It wasn't started until 62. By the time it
was partially finished, Apollo funding was down
to zero. Not completely, but It certainly didn't
need a six-mile radius base of operations with a
canal that connected it to the Gulf and a model base
and a test and 48,000 feet of biology laboratory
and 20,000 feet of computer space and all that kind
of thing. And I think that we gained from that. And I
think the taxpayer eventually gained because it
means that the money they spent won't be wasted.
That's a way of saying it. Of course, you can argue
that. It would be better sometimes to waste the
taxpayers' money and stop something than to
perpetuate it. But is it not true that the
equipment for NASA, for example, is easily
converted to equipment for oceanography? That
place is probably 85% designed as you would design
it as an oceanographer, frankly. And that's an
answer in saying yes to your question in more
specific terms. Have you found it easier, I take it
now, to consolidate in 1976 than you did in 1963?
Yes, and there was one other thing that happened in
1975 that wasn't here in 63, and it began to happen
right after the Vietnamese War. The drive, and
perhaps you'll again say that it's because of my
parochialism, but let me put it this way. The drive
towards socialism in this country tends to
dictate an increase in the bureaucracy in Vietnam
areas like health, education, and welfare. So you
know how partial I am, I'll say, in the giveaway
programs. By that, the whole country pretends
they don't want to be socialistic, but they vote
for programs which help themselves. But they
won't vote for just continually increasing the
bureaucracy in Washington. So this puts a
pressure on the bureaucracy in Washington if they
don't absolutely have to be here to get their A out
of town. So about 1970 or 71, a major drive was
reinstated by certain members of Congress to get
the Department of Defense and specifically the
Navy out of the National Capital Region. And this
worked to the advantage of consolidation because
if somebody is forcing you to get out, as you're
leaving, you hopefully will head for one location
instead of for 15. And I think that was really the
final straw that that pushed us over the hump.
Sounds like an 18th century British idea of
sending the armies out to the colonies so they
can't be seen. Probably true. Probably true. I
think that's partially it, but from a
congressional viewpoint, it's also so they can
have more room to put in more of their own kind of
troops. In fact, it's fascinating. Mr. Nixon,
regardless of what you think of him, swore he'd
decrease the bureaucracy in Washington. He put
out figures that said he'd decrease them by 1,000.
Mike Causey, who writes for The Washington Post, I
think his figure was 11,000 increase. And I trust
Mike's figures more than I would the president's.
That's about what we increase to the year, about
10,000, 11,000. All you do is walk around this town
or fly over it, and you can see it's increasing.
It's Parkinson's third law. It's just not the
exception that proves the rule. It's just
Parkinson moving forward. It's going to be that
way forever. I want to ask, the next question I want
to ask you is one that you may choose not to answer.
And that is that between 63 and 75, 76, now you've
been intimately associated with the development
of oceanography now for 13 years and almost in a
continuum. Have you noticed any change in
administrations? Any congressmen who are
particularly sympathetic towards you? Any ones
who are particularly opposed to you? I can answer
that question in my own view. I think that The
congressmen who supported oceanography in the
mid-60s maintained their support throughout
their tenure in office. I think the man we lost that
was doing the most to bring things into focus was
Alton Lennon of one of the Carolinas who headed the
subcommittee on oceanography and who very
fortunately was also on the Armed Services
Committee so he could sucker the Navy into doing a
lot. He retired, and then there was a sort of a lack
of leadership. Mrs. Sullivan had the full
committee, and she was leading, but she wasn't
able to devote as much time on just oceanography.
She was worrying about merchant marine and
fishing and that sort of thing, but she wasn't able
to put the time that Mr. Lennon put on oceanography
in general. And then we had the outer continental
shelf problem that sort of masked what we were
doing in oceanography and the law of the sea, which
masked what we were doing. And then on the House
side, now we have a new leader there. He's a very
young man, Mr. Breaux from Louisiana, who I think
is going to put the same drive back into the
committee that Mr. Lennon had, or maybe more,
because he's younger. On the Senate side, we had
Senator Magnuson, who I guess was the leader. And
he has certainly never given up a minute on his
drive. And he was joined recently, within the
last, say, decade, by Senator Hollins, who has
made a major effort in this area. And there's many
other senators and congressmen who have. I don't
think anybody has fought against it. But I would
say that oceanography has not increased for maybe
two or three reasons. is because of the apathy of
the American public and therefore the members of
Congress. I remember Mr. Alexander from Arkansas
coming over to me and saying, well, you know, they
got cartoons of me sitting with a bunch of
bikini-clad blondes and the beasts saying this is
why I'm going scuba diving. Well, the fact of the
matter was he was up in very cold weather off of
Massachusetts where there weren't any women
around in the middle of the winter and the most
horrible place in the world to go for diving. But
his opponents were trying to make it look like he
was on a boondock. There's another problem, I
think, in oceanography, and that is nobody can
really say what it is we want it for. I can say what I
want it for in the Navy. Some of the oil companies
can say what they want it for. Some of the fishing
people and some of the shipping people and some of
the mining people argue about it, but they aren't
as concrete about it as one would hope. Then you
have the dilemma of how much do you want the federal
government involved in in a subject. Do you want it
to regulate it? Do you want it to control it? Do you
want it to do it? See, I hold we don't want the
federal government to do it. We want to keep the
federal government involvement from a
bureaucratic viewpoint as low as possible, and
yet we want to use the federal government's
dollars to do those things which cannot be done on
the outside for one reason or another. And
oceanography, a lot of that fits in that category.
On the other hand, we have developed, certainly
within the federal government, a significant
amount of technology. We are spending probably
almost $100 million a year in academic
oceanography today. I think we should spend twice
as much, but I'm not so sure the rest of the country
would agree to that. We're getting more than our
fair share of the pie academically, in a sense.
It's spread further. The rice bowl that started
out with a dozen places And you and I, knowing
everybody that was in the dozen places, has now
spread to several hundreds. And the inflation
being what it is, $100 million is only equal to
about $50 million in 1962 in oceanography because
of the high cost of ship operations and all this
computer work and the salaries too. So it's hard to
say.
But I think that Mr. Eisenhower, supported it not
because he understood it, but because Mr. Wakeman
came to him and said, Mr. President, here's what
I'd like to do. And Mr. President says, fine, Jim,
do it. But he never got any personal support from
the White House beyond that. Then the next
president of the United States was Kennedy. The
way we got Kennedy interested in it was a lot of
people aren't aware of this. We made a movie. It was
called Science for Survival. It was a catchy
title. It was done by the Navy. But it wasn't done
for the Navy. It was done for oceanography. And it
showed the interagency committee functioning.
And we got Mr. Kennedy to agree to do the opening and
closing to it. And when we wrote the script for the
president, he threw it down and talked in his own
language. And then the day that he was
assassinated, I was sitting in the White House
theater room or wherever it was we were screening
the motion picture and had just gotten tentative
approval from the White House to release the
picture. And Mr. Johnson made a... arbitrary
moratorium on mr. Kennedy's works for 90 days and I
forget whether it was in honor of his death but that
picture got caught in the moratorium then I had to
go back and and say the ex-president you know and
change the soundtrack has never got released then
it finally got released mr. Johnson really
involved himself in My feeling was the following,
and I'm sure that Senator Humphrey will tell you
differently, and I'm sure Ed Wink will tell you
differently. My feeling was Mr. Johnson, being a
Texan and being the man he was, felt very simply,
hell, if you want to do anything in the ocean, tell
the Navy to do it. You know, he looks at life in a
simplistic fashion. I think the reason that he set
up the President's Science Advisors Study, the
PSAC study on oceanography, and I believe the
title was Effective Use of the Sea, was in response
to congressional pressure. It certainly wasn't
on his own initiative. I think it was in response to
pressure put on by Magnuson and Lenin, they being
the two leaders at the time. You know, damn it, Mr.
President, if you don't do something, we will. No
president wants to be told by Congress that they,
Congress, are going to take the initiative. And
the simple way out of anything is to do a study. So
they did a study. But, you know, we'd already done a
NASCO study and a Navy study, and then we did a PSAC
study. Interesting enough, in that time frame,
there were two things that allowed it to grow that
do not exist today. One, the Navy wanted everybody
else in it and was willing to help fund it in a
certain sense. It's still willing, but it doesn't
have the money now.
Two, there was so much to be done, there wasn't any
competition among agencies in reality. Three,
Nobody really realized what it was going to cost
them, because they were talking science. I guess
there's probably a lot of other reasons, but those
are probably the primary reasons. I have heard
people say in ONR that, as a matter of fact, the Navy
went out deliberately to create oceanographic
departments to handle, in effect, specific
problems. Well, more than that, we even, I
remember one time, illegally, operating the
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries boats because
they ran out of money and I needed to have something
done. And I think Tex was the guy that was in charge
of the program to go ahead and get the Bureau of
Commercial Fisheries fishing fleet, the
government fishing fleet that belonged to the
Bureau, out doing something for the Navy.
Certainly I had complete policy direction from
the Secretary to do that because there was so much
to be done. I didn't mean you gold-plated or do it in
a great fence, but it meant you were able to help
them. And, you know, sometimes I can't put the ship
to sea, not because I need all the money, but I have
to tie a ship up because I don't have the last
$100,000. Another thing we had then, too, which
was very interesting, and that is I don't know how
Mr. Wakelin accomplished it, but we had attention
in then the Bureau of the Budget, which is now the
Office of Management, and we had a man at level
three or four within the Bureau of the Budget who
physically sat on the coordinating committees,
and we did have some effect on other agencies'
budgets. And also, when the Navy ran the
interagency committee, the Navy, in spite of what
Ed Wink and other people say, had its staff under
Bob Abel totally separate from the Navy, and they
didn't work for the Navy except as billets, but
they did not. They were funded by the Navy, but they
didn't take the Navy position, and they didn't
know what the hell the Navy position was. So they
were truly an interagency group. And we were
criticized because the stationary they put out
was put out as an interagency stationary. But I
think that was proper. They were trying to do
interagency work instead of Department of the
Navy work. When people start feuding with each
other, it's very difficult to do anything
together. And you've probably read Ed Wink's
book, Ocean Policy or the Politics of the Ocean.
He's an interesting individual. I think made a lot
of contributions but I think was unwilling to use
the Navy. And I think in oceanography, whether you
like it or not, you have to use the Navy because the
Navy's there. And I think you have to sucker the
Navy into helping other people because there's
certain things that no other agency could
generate a critical mass to do it. What other
agency could generate a critical mass in the 60s to
have built the navigational satellite system, to
have built the submarine, to have...
computerized half the world. Well, do you think
there would have even have been an interest in, for
example, oceanography developed in the academic
world, or not such things as deep scattering
layers, or bathya thermometers to measure
thermoclines, or? Maybe there would have been by
the 1980s, 90s, or 2000, but certainly the Navy was
the one that, as a result of his bad experience in
World War II, in fact, drove the focus in
oceanography. But it was the Navy that forced
still the National Science Foundation into it. It
wasn't the National Science Foundation
competing with ONR. The Navy actually lobbied to
get the foundation into oceanography because we
benefit from what they're doing. It was Dr.
Wakelin, initially, who wanted the buoy system
under the Coast Guard, who wanted the Sea Grant
Program under the National Science Foundation
and not under the Navy. The earlier years were very
cooperative. The latter years, because of the
forces of the dollar and so forth, have been
perhaps less cooperative. Although I would say,
from where I sit, the academic community has been
between 90% plus cooperative all the time. They
have their feuds among themselves, like we all do.
But I think that I certainly still feel that
they're fully cooperative. And I am not the major
funder of the academic community anymore. I've
dropped from number one to number three,
probably. I take it that in terms of the move that
you make to Gulfport, I think this will not
separate you from cooperation with ONR and NSF.
No, because I will continue as a person to stay here
myself and maintain the bureaucracy to fight for
the dollars and to articulate the program and
fight that in the joint arena. But I think the
technical workmanship coming out of the other
elements of the program that were scattered
around Washington will be further away from the
bureaucratic hot air that comes out of this town
and therefore may be able to get together better
with the academic community technically as
opposed to bureaucratically. I still will not put
bureaucracy down in the technical activity, but
I'm going to try to separate out technical
accomplishment from bureaucratic hot air.
That's hard to do, and you know that, but it's just
the way our system works. I'm not being negative.
It's just that we are so big in this country that you
just can't survive without a lot of bureaucracy.
seeing a lot of hot air. Now, I want to go back to 63
again. When you looked upon the problems you felt
as if you had in the Naval Department of
Oceanography, or the Oceanographic Department
of the Navy, really, then how did you try to direct
your department at once? What were your immediate
short-range goals? Where did you think, in what
ways should oceanography be? Well, the first
place we tried to move it was expand it in the
academic community. because if you look at the
rationale for a subject which you understand very
little, you ask yourself, well, since you can't
foresee exactly what you're going to need and what
you're going to have, like the game we were playing
before, you say, all right, we need to pump more
money into the basic part of it, and we are pleased
with what we see with regard to the capability of
the people that exist in the academic world, so why
can't we get more people involved in the academic
world and build up the academic program? You do
this simultaneously with trying to Then answer
yourself, what are your capital assets you need?
And the capital assets we needed or thought we
needed were more ships, more modern ships. We
involved, parallel to that, a shipbuilding
program for the academic world and for the Navy.
And thirdly, and I think not lastly, but I think
almost just as important, was the sudden
realization that the Thresher disaster should
have awakened us to the fact that we may need to
operate at any time at any depth because we didn't
know what our competition was doing. And I look at a
military enemy as a competition, because you win
when you've got a better product if you're
commercial and you do the same thing in the
military. And a better product is people and
training and equipment and knowledge. And I think
the Soviets have shown us how fast they could come
from zero knowledge in the oceans to, and I'm
speaking knowledge-wise, not military-wise,
and how they're integrating their military
operations in such a sense that the knowledge of
the ocean allows them to get an edge on occasion
over us. And I guess the scariest part was ocean
engineering, because any one of us who's ever been
in a major development program knows the
difference between dollars for an academic
scientific endeavor and an engineering
endeavor. And that's several orders of
magnitude. I think my knowledge with the Polaris
program had already taught me just how costly And I
guess I have to retract the statement and say that
my first time in oceanography really was with the
Polaris program because then was a sudden
realization that you couldn't get a missile
launched from a platform under the water through
the air surface interface without knowing, one,
where it was, and two, how to go through this
interface. And I began to recognize for the first
time how little we knew, how lacking we were even in
such basic things as charts for submarines. and
also how little we knew on our accuracy of our
navigation, because I'd grown through the same
reform school and been told that the nautical
almanac was accurate within 100 yards, and I was
too proud to say when I took a star sight that I
didn't know exactly where I was, and it wasn't
until later in life I realized I was five miles off.
I got smarter as I got older. But I think that was not
age, that was just a... You'd been taught all your
life that this is an accurate way to navigate, and
it is mathematically, but You add all the errors
together of a rolling ship and a sextant and a mark
one eyeball, and you get yourself a lot of errors, a
lot of errors. So I guess there was an involvement
there, even if it wasn't an over-depriving
interest.
So I take it then that towards ocean engineering is
where you aimed the program right then, right? I
aimed it three ways. I aimed it in the increased
significantly, like an order of magnitude, the
academic program in Rio. And when I say an order of
magnitude, I don't mean 10 times the dollars. I
mean 10 times the academic mandate's
involvement. In other words, how many people are
working on research in the field? And you've got to
be careful here because we kept our money growing
slowly, but in reality the number of mandates that
we have today is half of what we had in the 60s, 10
years apart because of inflation and because of
cost of ship outbreaks. So I wanted to go up several
orders of magnitude in academic involvement. I
wanted to go up in capital investment on ships and
computers. I never won the business on computers.
The academic world started to do that, but the Navy
world really never got to where I thought it should
be. And thirdly, and parallel to this, the real
weakness in the Navy side of the program was real
clear. We just didn't have the technology to be
able to see what the other guy is doing or go down on
the bottom of the ocean or retrieve things or this
sort of thing. And that was costly, and that was
really costly. In fact, of course, we don't have
that capability today. Instead of the goal I set of
six rescue vehicles, we have two, and neither of
them are fully operational, and that was 10 years
ago. You know, it's frustrating when you stop and
realize it. Now, when you make overtures to the
academic community, you try to extend your
liaison to the academic community, did you try to
meet academicians? Oh, yeah. That was in the
beginning. Well... Working on the Interagency
Committee with the National Academy of Sciences,
I was actually either visiting their places or
meeting them in Washington almost on a weekly
basis. And again, you've got to remember that
these people were interested in the Navy's
problems. These people weren't just interested
in the buck or the size of their university. They
were truly interested in some of the Navy's
problems. And I think this is a uniqueness in this
field that was almost unparalleled, except
perhaps during the war in the Manhattan Project.
But certainly, we had no problem with this. In
fact, even the anti-military feeling in Vietnam,
even though it caused a few minor problems in
certain universities, really didn't impact on
oceanography.
Now, and so you make liaisons to the academic
community, you have them work on specialized
problems, and you also have them do work on
generalized research as departments grow. In
terms of ocean engineering, then, did you try to
tie that into the academic world also? No. At that
time, I did not try to tie ocean engineering into
the academic world. except in one or two cases. And
that was a realization that certain tools that you
could design, you could give to the academic
community, and they could operate them for you in a
better environment than, say, a military
environment. And the example of that, I guess the
classic example of that, is the FLIP vehicle for
Scripps and the Alvin for Woods Hole. And I'm still
working on that kind of philosophical approach.
And, of course, the MISAR for the Naval Research
Lab, which the Naval Research Lab at that time in
that particular group was very close, if you will,
to an academic type of graduate training level. I
think that that's perhaps the best way to do it
then. Today, it'd be interesting to get the
universities in the engineering field, but I
wanted to make real concrete, specific
improvements, like the physical capability of
taking a man out of the out of a submarine, or taking
them off of a submersible, or going down on the
ocean floor with a man. Now, there's an
interesting thing, because in the biomedical
side of aspect, in the engineering side, because I
sort of put man, the sea, and the engineering side
of the Navy, we actually chose to do 80% of that work
in universities. Now, we're doing some of it
in-house with the National Institute of Health
and with the Naval NMRI, the Naval Medical
Research Institute of Bethesda. But, for
example, the work being done at Penn and Duke and
those kinds of places are significant and are
making major contributions and have an advantage
over the Navy that they can, they don't have to be as
hidebound by blood-written regulations as we
are. They can perhaps go further in the forefront
than we can, perhaps. So that balance there was
done intentionally. But the rest of engineering,
universities are not good places in general to
build weapons systems or large systems. They can
probably do it. And what I mean probably, they did
it. They built the album. But they take a long time
to do it.